Okay, we're talking to James McBride.
Chris, you know, I read the book, so I don't have to ask you what you have to say.
But tell me about it.
You're a jazz musician.
You're a journalist.
Right.
And we'll just put this closer.
Okay.
Tell me about the quest here.
Oh, how it started?
Yeah.
Well, you know, I had reached the point where...
I've reached the point where I had to discover who I was, basically, and that was about four years ago.
That's when I got to be about 30, but really, you know, the rubber met the road around four years ago.
And, you know, I reached the point where I sort of was going about the process of discovering who I was, and I realized I couldn't do that unless I discovered who my mother was.
And you didn't know who your mother was?
Well, not in a real true sense.
You know, as you know, when I was a boy, she denied being white.
And she refused to talk about her history for years and years.
She would never talk about her past.
You didn't know that she was the daughter of Orthodox Jews?
I knew when I was about 15, 16 years old, I knew she was Jewish.
And I also learned that she was the daughter of an Orthodox rabbi.
But I had no idea what that meant.
I had no idea what it meant.
You know, you can't make stuff like this out.
But see, you know, my siblings didn't know about it.
In fact, they didn't.
Most of the stuff they found out about mommy, they found out by leaving the post.
Okay.
How's that?
No, I don't mind at all.
No, most of the stuff they found out about her, they found out.
by reading the book.
So, it was, you know.
So, you're talking here.
I forgot what I was talking about.
What were we talking about?
You knew that she was Jewish.
Oh, yeah.
Well, I knew she was Jewish, but I had no idea what that meant.
I hadn't, you know, I mean... And what do you mean you didn't know what it meant?
I didn't know anything about Jewish people at all.
I mean, I knew what most people know about Jews.
In New York, what I knew about Jews as growing up in New York is there were a lot of them.
And that on certain Jewish holidays, we didn't have to go to school.
You know, that's about it.
I mean, that's... It wasn't much... It didn't seem that there was much to know.
It was only when I...
went down south to visit her town in Suffolk.
When I went to Suffolk, Virginia to visit where she grew up, that's when it really came out.
Because what happened was, you know, she was really resistant to me talking to her about her life as a young girl.
And a lot of that had to do with the fact that she was, you know, she suffered, you know, child abuses, you know, sexual molestation as a child, and her father was an abuser.
And so a lot of that had to do with that.
And a lot of it had to do with the fact that she just didn't know how fascinated I would be with it, or any of her children would be with it.
Do you think she just didn't want this part of her history to be known?
I mean, she has 12 children.
No, I think that it wasn't, I don't think it had anything to do with that.
I think it had to do with the fact that she had always tried to protect us from the world and raise us so that we wouldn't be confused kids.
And I think by throwing in this whole element of her own Judaism and her own history, at least when we were little, which seemed to make it more confusing for us in her eyes.
And also, just the talking about it was so painful for her.
It was just like eating fire.
I mean, you know, the way it sounds in the books, you know, the way it sounds in the book, it's like, you know, she's just sort of, you know, she's purging herself.
It didn't exactly come out that way.
I mean, it was a lot of
dancing back and forth, a lot of, I can't tell you because you're my son, and you know, I can't talk to my son like this, and a lot of, you know, convincing.
I mean, what really sort of brought her around was the fact that she wants to see her sister, and she's hoping that the book will sort of, you know, draw her sister out.
That and the fact that I've been managed to convince her that I was going to do it regardless.
Really?
And that, you know, even if I wrote about myself,
There's no way I could get around not writing about her, and that people would be inspired by her story, by her courage.
She doesn't see herself like most people who are in those positions.
They never see themselves as being courageous or doing heroic things.
They just see themselves as doing what they need to do to survive.
And, of course, it's more than just the circumstances of where she came from and what she came from.
Look what she did with her children.
Look at the product, my God.
It would have been so easy with that many kids and, you know, given tough times and stuff, you guys could have gone another way.
Well, she just was relentless in terms of her view of education.
I mean, when I was a kid, college was a foregoing conclusion.
There was no debating.
You were going to go to college.
And this whole element of school, I think, you know, in terms of her
school, she would just, in that way, I think she showed her so-called Jewishness, if there's such a thing, because she was absolutely insistent that we go to Jewish schools.
We were the only kids in our neighborhood.
You must have sensed something at that point.
Well, no, I just, no, it wasn't that.
She just, I don't know, I mean, I can't say that, because I just thought my mother was a weird person, and I desperately wanted to be like, I desperately wanted her to look like and be like my friend's mothers, who were all black,
who sent their kids to the local school, and she wasn't, you know.
And so you'd be surprised.
I mean, there are people who live with denial for years and years.
You know, like a person who's an alcoholic can be an alcoholic for years and years and not admit it and not even know it.
It's such an interesting turn.
Just exactly at this time last year, I went down to Martha's Vineyard and did an interview with Dorothy West.
You know, Dorothy West is... She's like an old... She's 87.
She's probably 88 now.
And she's the last surviving member of the Harlem Renaissance.
And she... And all these other people.
Extraordinary people.
And she wrote this book called The Wedding.
And, of course, what she talks about is black people passing for... That's an expression that... Right.
Passing for white.
This is an inversion, isn't it?
Yeah, you know.
A very interesting inversion.
Well, you know, Mommy's a weird lady.
I mean, she's definitely not your average mother.
I mean, she was perceived as an African-American woman, it seems to me.
Well, yeah, she did, because she felt that was where she was accepted.
And that's where she ultimately felt like she belonged.
I mean, even though, you know, she was raised as a Jewish person, she did feel...
You know, on some level still feels a little bit like she belongs in black America because black America embraced her and didn't judge her.
She says that about black people, even today.
You know, her friends are the ones who are still living, you know.
Don't ask her what school that her son went to or, you know, was he a summa cum laude graduate?
They don't ask her those kinds of questions.
They ask her basic questions.
Is everyone healthy?
Is everyone alive?
you know, because they, I guess they know the level of pain that my mother's gone through.
You know, her friends have experienced pain too.
Some of her old black friends, you know, they had their son, you know, she's watched her friend's sons and daughters die of age and, you know, sort of the urban problems sort of overtake her friends' families.
And so she understands, and she doesn't ask them questions.
I mean, it's just sort of like, I guess it's this understanding of how to deal with pain.
And she had come from so much pain
that she just felt, she's always felt very comfortable around black people.
And Mommy's a non-judgmental person.
You should call her Mommy.
Yeah, Mommy, yeah.
I mean, people, you know, I say that, but yeah, I still call her Mommy.
We all do.
I mean, she's still got the power at 74.
You know, she's still... There's no question, right?
It's not democracy when you sit around the table.
No, it's not democracy, which is weird because, you know, when you think back to, you know, her father, you know, he was a, you know, he was, it wasn't a democracy either.
He was autonomous, is that the word?
You know, he was the one and only, you know, isolated rule of the house.
And Mommy in my house was the one and only isolated rule.
I mean, there wasn't any debate, you know.
And, of course, a factor is, when you talk about making 180 degrees, the fact that
The fact that her family did a shiva for her.
She's dead, basically.
Right, yeah.
They said shiva for her.
Yeah, they said shiva.
Yeah, I mean, you know, and when I first learned about that, I was angry about it.
But then I learned about how Orthodox Jews lived, you know, lived in that time, and how her family, I'd say I learned how her family lived.
And when I learned how her family lived and what they believed,
It was in character for them to do that, and it wasn't anything... I don't see anything wrong with it, you know?
I mean, uh... I don't think it had anything to do at all with the fact that she was marrying a black man.
I think it's the fact that she was leaving this... She's leaving that world.
She could have married a Greek like me.
It wouldn't have made any difference.
That's right.
That's right, yeah.
She's leaving that world, and...
And it wasn't a pleasant experience for them to see.
And also, you know, they were going through their own problems.
I mean, not knowing what to keep, not knowing what to leave behind.
And when you think about how some of these immigrant families come to America and the kind of suffering they have, you know, the suffering that they experience.
Our family certainly experienced a lot of anti-Semitism growing up in the South.
But you talk about it.
I mean, to go from, you know, this tradition, a tradition, what's the word I'm looking for, and this heritage of a really suppressed people during the Holocaust, and now to come to the United States and New York and go through it again.
And go through it again.
Does she articulate her?
feelings on this?
Well, you know, she doesn't really see herself, you know, the pain that she's experienced in her life, she just, it just slips off her like she's got, you know, you know how those wrestlers put oil on each other so they can't grab each other?
She's just like, God is her oil, you know, and she just wears that oil and everything just bounces off like water.
I mean, she doesn't really feel
When we were young, I can remember people calling her honky and nigger lover.
I remember when I was getting on the escalator, one time she was leading about six of us.
This white man pushed her and called her nigger lover and all kinds of names.
This was on the escalator, in the subway in Manhattan.
I was a boy, you know, and mommy just ignored it.
She ignored any of those kind of insults unless they affected her children.
I mean, if they were directed at us, she would fight back ferociously.
But otherwise, it didn't bother her.
Even now, it doesn't.
And it's interesting, because I've reached a point in my life where that kind of stuff doesn't bother me either.
Now, how about you?
Now, what does your father figure into this?
Well, my father, my biological father, died before I was born.
My stepfather, my parents, you know, my stepfather and father,
were a curious blend of, you know, Jewish-American paranoia and Black-American distrust into the house, in that they didn't really care too much about what the outside world did or thought.
My stepfather, you could call him any name in the book, it didn't matter to him.
All he cared about was our grades and did we go to church on Sunday.
He didn't really care about, you know, he'd grown up in the Jim Crow South and, you know, he didn't even talk about
his experiences in the Jim Crow South, refused to, just didn't want to discuss it.
All he wanted to talk about was the future.
He felt that the past was over and that what was done was done.
He used to, the only time he would talk about race, he would occasionally mention there was an Italian guy who gave him a job when he worked for the city.
He was a furnace farmer for the New York City Housing Authority.
And there was an Italian guy who got him the job, which was actually illegal because my father had been arrested for
making illegal booze during the drawing 20s.
Grandfather had the same problem.
Right, you know.
So they weren't supposed to hire him, but this Italian guy got him that job.
And he would always say, he would always mention that.
He often would mention that.
He'd say, well, you know, look, you know, because any time there's racial talk, we'd start flying around the house, my elder siblings would say, well, you know, well, how come white people don't really, you know,
And my stuff, I would say, you know, I don't know what you're talking about.
This man gave me a good job.
He didn't know me from Adam.
And you can't go around saying them because you don't know them.
You know, he just wasn't, my parents weren't very, they didn't really care so much about what the outside world did or thought.
They only cared what happened within the confines of the world that they created.
So, you know, during the racially, you know, charged times of the 60s,
It's a difficult period in my house because, you know, during the late 60s, my father, my stepfather, was very old, and then he died in 1972.
And during that period, like, from 65 to 75, you know, Mommy had to really sort of rein us in.
She was sort of like the one who really had to deal with the, you know, all the lip service of the 60s that we would bring into the house, especially with all the siblings.
We talk about...
First of all, I mean, you've got four siblings that are doctors, is that right?
No, I got two who are doctors.
They're all like caretakers, you know, a bunch of teachers.
One's a chemist.
Caretakers and what respect?
Well, you know, none are really business.
I think one is like a business.
They're professionals, yeah.
One's the chairman of the History Department of Penn State.
They're all very, you know.
I got my master's degree in Penn State.
Oh, did you really?
Yeah.
That's far from here.
Yeah, well.
I got some money to go there that helps, you know.
Kept me out of the service for another year.
Anyway, I mean, yeah, we just follow one after the other.
We just, you know, we knew Dennis went to college, oh, and then Billy went to college, and Billy said,
Okay, I'm going to college, but just because Dennis goes to Europe, I am not going to Europe, you know.
Okay, well, you don't have to go to Europe, but you have to go to college.
I mean, it was just... It was a complete, so to speak.
Absolutely.
It was just unquestioned.
And, of course, when you talk about taking the tests and applying for schools... Well, we were expected to do that, but Mommy would fill out the financial aid form.
We were expected to select colleges and...
do all that by ourselves on our own, but Mommy was the one who filled out the applications for financial aid because she knew how to put those zeros in the right place.
And everybody was?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, we got, all of us, it took years to pay back, you know, all of us paid back school loans over.
I mean, we had a lot of loans.
And were there scholarships?
There were scholarships available, and how it worked for most of us was they'd give us a big scholarship the first year, and then gradually decrease the scholarship and increase the loans.
And then by the time, you know, by the time you got out of school, you were... And maybe some of the schools where the siblings went to?
Oh, a bunch of it.
Yale University, University of Pennsylvania, Oberlin, Columbia.
That's spectacular.
Uh, Adelphi, Syracuse.
Not a clunker among them.
Uh, yeah, all, they all went to pretty good schools.
Uh, let's see, uh, Lincoln University, that was a, that was a big one.
That was a really good black school.
It still is.
I heard Charles Blockson.
Yeah, he's, uh,
He's in my book.
He's a friend of mine.
Oh, really?
I profile him in my book.
He's a great football player.
Right.
He turned down an offer from the New York Giants.
He was Lenny Moore's roommate at Penn State.
Great, great ball player.
And he went out to become this book collector and to create this great African-American library, which is now at Temple University.
And to me, he's one of the great, great
This is a guy that could have been a pro football player.
And Lenny Moore told me, he said, I thought he was nuts when he walked away from that job.
Is he still living?
Charles is a young man.
I was just talking to him two years ago, yeah.
Wonderful, wonderful guy.
He's curator of his own collection down at Temple.
In Philadelphia?
Yeah.
But to me, you talk about aspiring, making models, and there's a point here.
The role model for you guys is your mother, isn't it?
Yeah, absolutely.
You're talking about a role model, an uplifting book about role models.
Every role model doesn't have to be a male basketball player or a football player.
Or it could be a white woman in the ghetto.
There you go.
I mean, you know, this whole thing about this whole thing.
I mean, you see I'm going with this.
Yeah, I mean, it makes a lot of sense.
I mean, you know, a lot of black people who know mommy have, you know, tremendous respect for our young people.
Friends of mine, you know, who I grew up with, friends of my siblings, they have a lot of respect for mine.
They're very proud that this book is out because they remember mommy.
I mean, she was hard to miss.
And even though she was very private, she was very, she was and always is.
She was always very kind, known as a very kind person.
She minded her business.
She didn't, you know, start trouble.
She didn't gossip about neighbor's kids and so forth.
But she was always very kind.
I think that was something I really didn't kind of, I don't know if I got there.
I made that clear in the book because I was so, you know, so many things to get, so much ground to cover.
But she's a very socially welfare kind of person.
She's a social welfare kind of person in that she believes in welfare.
I mean, she thinks welfare, when it's done properly, works, you know, because a lot of her friends who, we were never on welfare.
We weren't, she just, we didn't go in that direction.
But we knew and she knew many people who were, many of whom got off, many of whom became successful.
And, you know, that whole Franklin D. Roosevelt, the whole social security system that gave you money for your kids, you know, until they were like 18 or something like that.
That was a lot of that was our bread and butter for many years.
And not to mention the fact that she worked and my stepfather worked.
She, you know, she brought a...
You know, these people who talk about biracial kids, like, you know, if you're a white couple, you can't adopt a black kid, you shouldn't adopt a black kid, or if you're a, or vice versa.
That's just misguided pride.
That's all that is.
Especially if somebody can really help his child.
I mean, who would you rather have your kid raised by?
A crack addict, you know, who's proud of his, our prisons are full of proud black and white people who are proud of their ethnic heritage, whatever it might be.
We have to move beyond.
I think that's, you know, I think that mommy's a living example of what happens when you move beyond the differences.
When I write this story, I'll send you a copy, if you'd like, of my Jamaican King piece, because she talks about this.
She never uses the word grace sometimes.
You know, she has a white husband and her children.
And when we were talking, they were talking now about some people want to make the census classifications, like if you have
mixed, if the children have mixed racial background, they want to put a mixed, which is ridiculous, isn't it?
Oh, God.
The name is my will put all of us in it.
And there are people on both sides who don't want it.
I mean, conservatives as well as Republicans.
It's the stupidest damn thing I've ever seen.
But she says race is just another way of enforcing power.
And so she tries not to, she doesn't really talk about it, she says, and it's consistent.
You see it in the writing.
Interesting.
That's true.
That's kind of what you're talking about here.
So, what were you talking about?
Let's talk about the significance of the title, okay?
And I think that's a wonderful title, and explain how she gave you that.
You know, the thing about Mommy is that
you know, mommy was making this up as she went along.
I mean, you know, she had, by the time I got to be of age, she had sort of developed some pat answers and pat behavior patterns that she could use to sort of fend off the truth and sort of keep you, you know, keep me bouncing along.
She was like a juggler who juggled like all these lies and just was constantly... Lies is the word, they're like DDS, right?
Lies, yeah.
You know, she was just constantly juggling these
you know, these 12 different... No, lies, which could have been... Oh, I see.
Yeah, no, no.
Yeah, well, she could juggle a few untruths, too, but no, she was juggling... When I come to transcribe this thing, I want to be sure that... No, I'm referring to lives.
L-I-V-E-S.
Yeah, she was constantly juggling all these different lives and needs and wants, and she grew very deft at manipulating us, extremely deft at manipulating us, and that was one of her gifts as a mother, in addition to the fact that she could...
What, was she trying to protect you from something?
Well, yeah, because she felt the world was not going to be that friendly to us.
I mean, she knew what it was like to be scorned in a lot of ways, not just, first of all, growing up as a Jew in, you know, an anti-Semitic circumstance.
You know, it's just, and then being in a mixed marriage in the 1940s where she couldn't even travel to the South with her husband and being chased around New York, you know.
She said they were chased around New York quite a bit when they were
married and they were, you know, they were attacked and so forth.
A pariah to everybody.
I mean, you know, two, you know, really, and she says that there were other mixed marriages during that period, but they never lasted.
They, you know, they would last for a year or two and they would break up.
So, come to the title here.
Well, the title is because I would ask her, you know, what color is God, you know, I'd ask her,
Is God black and white?
Now, why would you ask for that question?
Because it occurred to me that when, as a boy, that the world was a world of black and white, in my limited experience.
And all the pictures of God and Jesus in Sunday school, they always showed a guy in white robes, you know, flowing hair, who looked like Jesus Christ superstar.
So, you know, I would put that question to mommy and
Our response was that God is the spirit and that he's the color of water.
See, our minister, we went to churches where, you know, it was just fire and brimstone.
It wasn't like deep theological, religious, you know, thinking that was like sort of handed down.
I mean, not when I was, you know, because my father was a very deep thinker, but he was dead when I was, by the time I was born.
I mean, our churches were just,
You know, it was just a basic throwdown, you know, we're so glad the gospel is done.
You know, it was all that.
And you just sat there until your butt got flat, and then it was time to go home.
And so, you know, the deep, pondering questions about life's deeper meanings and one's connection to God were rarely, if ever, answered by our ministers or our Sunday school teachers.
And the deep questions of life, my siblings and I usually pond them among ourselves.
And if you were lucky, you had five minutes along with Mommy where you could throw it at her, and she might give you a response that was credible, you know, or believable.
Now, where were you in terms of... I'm the eighth.
You're the eighth.
I was one of the younger ones.
Okay, so there are four younger ones.
There are four younger ones, yeah, than me.
And did you discuss your intention to do this with...
No, yeah, with some of them, like my sister, my older sister was at her, and they knew I was doing it, but after a while, you'd be surprised, and a family of 12 kids, now with 12 kids plus spouses plus, you know, grandchildren.
They're pretty much all over the place?
Well, probably about two-thirds of them in the New York, New Jersey area, New York, between New York and Philadelphia, and the rest are in Atlanta, Georgia.
with the exception of one who's in North Carolina.
There's so much activity in my family that there are always two or three things going on that are prominent, you know.
This, you know, the din of orchestrated chaos just continues.
Even as a kid, you know, our house was constant chaos.
You know, there'd be a Monopoly game here, you know, dominoes there, a football game over there, two kids dressed in football helmet, fur coats, and high heels in July, you know, acting like the New York Giants.
I mean, it was just...
And that kind of walking shade of chaos continues today on a grown-up scale.
So above the den, occasionally, like, a big event arises, you know, like, oh, Dennis is graduating from college.
And so, you know, the whole groundswell of activity sort of, all the searchlights sort of focus on that.
And then ten minutes later, it's over, and then, you know, then it's this chaos.
Well, what's the reaction to the book?
Well, the reaction to the book is that this book has risen to the fore now.
This book is sort of...
you know, risen to the fore of the orchestrated chaos.
You're on stage now.
Yeah, I'm the king for just, I'm getting my, look, I'm seven and a half minutes in to my 15 minutes.
As far as the family is concerned.
I'm about, you know.
There's going to be a movie out of this.
Yeah, well, then I'll get another seven, you know.
You know, but after that, you know, this book is going to get, my family can swallow any event.
Like, you know, just like the big, you know, like,
Like the big, you know, what's the monster on television, Godzilla, you know, and then it's done.
And, you know, like a burp, burp.
And then, you know, what's next?
Because it's just, you have these 13 different individuals, 12 different individuals, who are still following, you know, my confused, crazy, sort of paranoid, but always number one mom.
What prompted your mother to go to college in her 60s?
That's another whole story in its own right, isn't it?
Yeah, well, you know what it is.
For one, she sent all of us, and she really does enjoy learning.
She loves learning, and she loves reading, and she likes to talk about writers and writing, you know.
She's into, you know, she always believed in education and knowledge.
But you are the writer of the family, right?
Yeah, I'm the writer of the family, yeah.
So in a way, then, she must have really thought this was cool, in a way.
When you're talking to my mother, it's like looking at a hand from both sides.
This side tells you everything is great.
This side is saying, hell no, we won't go.
She's been like that her whole life.
She's yes, no, yes, no, yes, no.
Even in the book, you can read between the lines.
You can see that there's sort of a yes, no, I want to talk to you, I don't want to talk to you, Helen in the way she talks about herself.
Studs Terkel, who
You know, I did his radio show.
I was going to ask you about that.
Well, I just met him last week.
Well, actually, I did him in New York.
Oh, you weren't part of the... Oh, you went to New York to interview him?
Yeah, I'd go to New York for interviews, too.
Oh, do you?
Anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Anyway, he was great.
And, you know, he does a lot of first-person accounts.
That's his thing, you know.
And he said, you know, he could read between the lines that,
She didn't want to do it, but she did want to do it.
And he really had it right, you know.
She didn't want to do it.
At first, she really did not want to do it.
But then she gradually agreed to do it.
She never really kind of consented, you know.
But it was like a yes, no.
I mean, that's Mommy's whole, you know, contradictions just smack against each other.
Like, what for you was the biggest surprise?
Well, I guess the biggest surprise,
The biggest surprise was learning that her father was a child molester.
Because that really took a long time for that to come out.
That came out when she was back and forth, and she was saying, I can't tell you, you're my son.
And she finally wrote the word M-O-L-E-S-T on a piece of paper, just stuck in the front of my face.
That was a hard hit to deal with, I felt like.
And do you suspect that that was what occasioned her leaving?
No, I think that it was a culmination of her father gradually dismantling his family, because he himself, and this is just a theory, did not know how to adjust to American life.
You know, he came here as a rabbi from Poland, sent over for his family, you know, he was married to a disabled woman who didn't speak English, and he ends up leaving her for a Gentile,
who had four kids, something like that.
And I just think he was one of these confused, dysfunctional people, man, who, you know, sometimes, who you sometimes run into.
You know, his son ran up when he was 15.
My mother ran up when she was 18 or so.
So obviously he had, you know, he was not... Can you explain why she ran up?
Well, yeah, if she couldn't, you know, her father divorced her mother.
And, um,
When he divorced her mother, she had reached the age of 18, and she just wanted her own money.
And they didn't talk to you.
The parents didn't want to talk to each other.
The father would talk to her.
She would talk to the mother.
Of course, her mother didn't speak English, so she was translating for her mother.
Her mother was getting sick, and she saw no future for herself down in Suffolk, Virginia.
It was isolation upon isolation.
Do you think your mother made a conscious decision to enter the black community, or did she fall in love with her man?
I think she made a conscious decision to go where she felt most comfortable, and having grown up on the side of town where blacks were when she was a little girl, when she came to New York, it just seemed logical to her to go in a place where she was both comfortable and excited to be.
You know, she always talks about Harlem in those years.
It was really exciting.
There's some wonderful books now.
Harlem was involved.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you know, in the 40s, Harlem was, well, before that, too, you know.
There's some books about it, which is just very terrific.
So tell me about, we've got a few more minutes.
You know, you're a musician.
Tell me a little bit about yourself.
I'm a, you know, I play piano, saxophone.
I play piano to compose.
And, you know, I've written songs for Anita Baker and Grover Washington.
And I wrote a big musical called Bobo's that won the American Music Theater Festival's Stephen Sondheim Award.
B-O-B-O-S.
And for that, I got the Stephen Sondheim Award.
And I guess I'm working now on my second album with a singer named Purafe, P-U-R-A-F-E.
He's like a Native American blues singer.
And that's pretty good.
And I started my second book, a novel about a black guy in World War II.
No more non-fiction for a while.
I mean... Did it take a lot out of you?
Oh, man.
I mean, I grew up... I mean, I grew a lot, you know.
The pain, out of that great pain... I can't describe what it's like to have all these, you know, 5,000 years of history just sort of dumped, you know, Jewish history dumped into your lap in the space of a few months.
But...
even though it was painful realizing the kinds of things that she'd gone through, it made me feel just so much... I feel clear, completely free.
You know what I mean?
Knowing, you know, where I come from and where I fit, you know, somehow I've created a niche for myself.
And it's good to know.
I mean, I feel very proud to have, you know, my Jewish background.
It's given me a new lease on life.
It's given me a... It's revived my spirit somehow because it's helped me see a part of myself that I never...
knew existed, but always had an idea that there was something more.
They didn't give us a picture of your mother here.
I wish they had.
Yeah, you know, the only picture in the book of her is when she, you know, she's in the back where she's a baby, and her mother and her brother has a passport picture.
It was one of those decisions where they felt like... Better to have the picture up here.
Yeah, yeah.
Interesting.
Yeah, I mean, you know... Actually, it's interesting.
I'd love to, you know, see her after.
Anything that you really wanted to learn that you didn't, that still remains a mystery for you?
That's a good question.
I'd like to know what it feels like to sit shiva.
I want to know what it feels like to do that, to actually partake in that.
You know, that whole mourning process, whole mourning ritual.
You know, because I just, you know, went through the whole gamut of emotions in terms of discovering mommies.
Is there anything factual about it?
Are you confident that you pretty much know her history?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I'm sure she's got a secret or two tucked away that I didn't get to.
And it's fine.
And everybody should have a few secrets.
Yeah, I mean, if you give it all away, I mean, what the hell?
And what's her reaction to the book?
Well, she cried when she read it.
Well, she read it and stayed up all night.
She couldn't sleep.
And she cried when she read it.
And afterwards, she told me that she liked it.
And she was proud that I'd done it.
But she only read it one time.
She only read it one time.
Very difficult for her to read about her family.
because she abandoned her mother, basically, and her sister.
And as you say, she hopes that perhaps with this book, there might be a... She's hoping that there's some sort of reconciliation with her sister that... At last, I mean, 30 years ago, 38 years ago, she was living in Cuba in Queens.
Physically, they're not... Physically, they're not that far apart.
There's no telling where the sister could be now, but I have a feeling she's not far away.
I could have found her.
I think she's alive, for sure.
I think she's alive.
I just have a feeling she's alive.
I'm sure I could have tracked her down, but I just feel like she's been through enough.
You know what I mean?
Some things you need to leave alone unless they want to be bothered.
For me, Chris, I've continued to hunt.
That's the kind of reporter I am.
I like to get my closure in some things, one way or the other.
That's the difference between you and I. I wouldn't have minded doing it for myself, but I can imagine that this woman has been through a lot of pain as a young girl because my mother's mother died when her sister was about 14, and her father wasn't worth two cents, really.
So she probably was not even raised by her father after he remarried a Gentile.
So, I mean, she did some heavy suffering.
You know, because I know what it feels like for a parent to die.
My stepfather died when I was 14, and I was crushed.
But at least I had my mother, you know.
Hello.
It's 914-358-8031.
Okay, you want to sign my book for me like that?
No, just tell me briefly.
Your mother must clearly love children to have 12 kids.
Was that important to her to have 12 kids?
Oh, well, she thought that we'd look out for each other when we'd get older.
That was one of the reasons I have so many.
You know, one would look out, and also we could babysit each other, which we did do, while she, you know, while she was at work.
You know, she had this king-queen system where the oldest was the king.
If it was, you know, depending on gender, you were the king or queen, and whoever was younger than you were slaves.
James, give me your address.
It's 118th.
Depot, the EPOT.